Can you briefly describe your research?
Taehoon: The retina is a thin yet sophisticated ocular tissue that converts light into electrical signals for vision processing. Currently, there is no outright cure for retinal and cerebral neurodegenerative diseases. Early detection is thus essential for their prediction, diagnosis, and prognosis. We have developed a custom-built spectral domain OCT system for optoretinography (ORG) measurement in mouse retinas. Different light conditions were applied to examine both light-evoked phototransduction response and dark-induced morphophysiological changes. We analyzed intrinsic optical signal (IOS) changes and alterations of hyper-reflective OCT bands. IOS data processing was refined, and imaging protocols were optimized in this study. In summary, my research enhanced the understanding of the optophysiological response of the retina under different light conditions and established an experimental basis for future clinical applications.

How would you describe your PhD journey?
Taehoon - My PhD journey was very nice. Although it was difficult, I had fun all the way. As a PhD student, you have protection from school and your advisor. Your time is flexible and not so stringent as being in the industry. You have the advantage to attend conferences fully paid for and, at this stage, the only thing I worried about was doing good research. Also, you have nothing to worry about if you make a mistake because people expect you to make a mistake since you are a student. So, it was a nice journey to me.

What was your PhD routine like?
Taehoon - My PhD routine was typical like most PhD students. I wake up by 7 am, eat something light, shower and get to the lab around 8. I get lunch at 11:30 am. I try to consistently leave the lab daily by 5 pm. Then I eat dinner around 6 pm. For my first three years, I reviewed papers, did some data processing and worked till midnight. I always try to maintain this sleeping time even during exams, so I do not disrupt the circadian pattern and my body cycle. I had to go to the lab almost during the weekends too because of the type of experiment I was involved in. Performing experiments during the weekend is a lot better because there are few people in the lab so you can have less distraction, better focus and better results*. It is very important to have a constant schedule or habit like this for a PhD program, especially a program that involves a lot of experiments.

How was balancing value/skill during your PhD?
Taehoon: The time I had for PhD research was sadly not enough. I was mostly focused on building the skills required for a successful doctoral program. However, I encourage students to try finding a balance between academic and non-academic skills.

Would you advise anyone to go into a PhD program?
Taehoon: I would advise anyone to get a PhD if there is no urgency in their life. For example, a survey was carried out on old people to understand if there’s anything they wish they did in their younger years. Most of them wished they had invested more time in knowledge. That’s why I said if there is no current urgency in your life, you should probably get a PhD. Also, being innately curious and having enough grit, to me, is more important than being smart or having any form of ability.

Do you have any regrets about your PhD program?
Taehoon: Speaking about regrets, maybe I should have done more regular exercise to increase my stamina. I should have also enjoyed more outdoor activities in Chicago.

What lessons have you learnt that you think are transferable to students who are enrolled in a PhD program?
Taehoon: I will encourage new students to be self-motivated. A self-motivated student is constantly discussing new ideas and new projects with his/her advisor. Students who take initiative and lead a project conveniently are self-motivated but I do not think this can be transferred.

What are your plans for the next step? Academia or Industry?
Taehoon: Working in either academia or industry is not a matter. Wherever I am, I will be a scientist who enjoys the research.

If you were to get another PhD, what field will you consider?
Taehoon: I would likely get a PhD in genetics to better understand the biological codes of living things.

How was your thesis style? What is story-based or chapter-based?
Taehoon: It was chapter-based. A cumulative of the different first-authored research publications I have made. So, I had different methods, different discussions etc.

Did you have any other mentors apart from your advisor during your PhD program?
Taehoon: I would say apart from my advisor, my committee members were the other mentors I had.

What was the most exciting memory you had in your PhD program
Taehoon: My mood was relatively the same. Moving to UIC was an exciting moment. Publishing first-authored papers were great moments. Going to the Bay area for a postdoc was a big achievement as well. These things happen rarely so the memories of it happening to me excite me every time I think about it.  


With the way people tend to microwave their success, does writing paper come easy to you?
Taehoon: Writing papers doesn't come easy to me. After several publications, it has become clearer. I cannot compare how I was a few years ago to how I am and it gets better with time (but definitely not easy). You must have logic. You must tell a story and the story must be in pursuance with the result of the experiment.

How did your relationship impact your PhD success?
Taehoon: Trinh really impacted my research a lot. She was always there for me. We helped each other, read each other’s work and supported each other. She was always positive, especially whenever I faced a roadblock. She directly impacted my PhD success in so many ways.

​​What does fulfillment mean to you?
Taehoon: Fulfillment to me means you are doing what you are really excited about.  