My exciting PhD journey!
This bfop is about my PñDJournep at Gfosqow Caledonian Uniuensity!



My first year PhD regrets!
Posted on November 25, 2010 by elenaohd

I have just submitted my PhD transfer report to my supervisors. What a relief! I was dreaming about 
this day for weeks, and am so glad it has finally arrived. Although I really hated the process of 
writing this wretched report to begin with, by the end of it I actually acquired taste for it, and 
saw the benefits. This important milestone in my PhD life made me reflect on my year of doctoral 
studies , and the things that I should have done, or have done better! So I thought I would write 
down some of my thoughts that might be useful for all those who have just started their PhD, and 
want to avoid disappointment.

• Start with...passion. When you start working on your project, the topic that you choose may be 
too broad, and needs narrowing down. Well, make sure that you narrow it down to something that YOU 
want to do for 3- 4 years, not something that your supervisors or advisors want but something that 
YOU are really passionate about. My topic was too vague to begin with, and it took me ages to find 
the right focus but now I am quite happy that I am working on a research project that will 
contribute to the existing knowledge but at the same time can make a difference to policy and 
practice! The only disappointment is that it took me too long to focus the topic.
• Read more around the topic. The first year of your PhD is possibly the only time when you can 
really plunge yourself into the world of reading. If you are lucky, you can make sense of it all 
soon... before submission of your first report. I regret that I was not systematic with my 
reading... bits and pieces here and there. Well, this probably reflects what a disorganised person 
I am! But I am learning...slowly. So do be systematic! The books that I found really useful are 
Doing a literature search and Doing a literature review by Chris Hart. They provide a pretty good 
picture of how you should go about your reading and writing in the initial stages of your PhD. 
Record everything you read and save references. There are a number of great web- based tools 
available out there. I personally use Zotero for organising research papers, and Delicious for 
bookmarking useful websites, blogs etc. Choose whatever suits you! But take my advice, start using 
them from the very beginning, and it will save you loads of time later on.
• Make a better use of your supervisors. One of my supervisors always says: We are not supervisors, 
we are collaborators on your project! Only now I probably understand the full meaning of these 
words. Don't simply sit and wait for your supervisors to tell you what to do (that's what I did at 
the beginning). When working on collaborative projects, people challenge each other, share ideas, 
and create solutions to the existing problems TOGETHER. Supervisors are members of your team! I 
agree, your situation might be different, and some supervisors have a very traditional 
Master-Apprentice approach. But still, the sooner you take the ownership of you project, the 
better! Remember, in 5-6 months you will become an expert in your field!
• Establish ‘love’ relationship with theory early on! What is the theory underpinning your study? 
I've been struggling with this bit for a year! It's not relevant to all social science studies 
since some of them adopt a grounded theory approach. But even to arrive at the conclusion that the 
existing theories don't meet the needs of your study, you need to know them first. I thought I 
hated theories until I started understanding them. It's actually really cool when you realise that 
there is enough brain in your head to see the shortcoming of some theory, criticise it and try to 
find an alternative approach.
• Learn to manage yourself! Still struggling with this bit... PhD is the time when you learn so 
much about yourself, the ways you prefer to work, and what motivates you to work. I am interviewing 
PhD students just now, and a number of them mentioned that a key to success in your PhD is 
DISCIPLINE! Can't but agree with

that. There is always a temptation to do some other things rather than concentrate on writing your 
thesis chapter. Learn to set the priorities! Priority matrix by Steven Covey. might be helpful to 
you in this.
Advertisements



















Well, enough regrets for one PhD year, I guess... But I think we should remember that PhD is a 
learning process, and we are allowed to make mistakes. The main thing is to reflect on your 
experience and try to improve it.












What are your PhD regrets?

Advertisements


Wittkop Sedlo se vzduchovym odpruzenim



CRIVIT% Dâmskâ / Pânskâ cyklistickâ helma




Sharethts:

Twitter   Facebook


Like
9 bloggers like this.



Related

A 3 day challenge OR how NOT to write a
ctinference paper...
II ‹n 1H, 2 t311


The secret life of a PhD student Ha› y, zoit
In ”re search”


Why? — Existential crisis, PhD or time to
Ice happy!
.Hinc' 1v, 2ti il

About elenaphd
I am a PhD fellow at Glasgow Caledonian University, Scotland. In my research project I am looking 
at employability of social science doctoral researchers.
View all posts by elenaphd  


This entry was posted in Uncategorized  and tagged research. supervision. TimeManagement. Bookmark 
the permalink.




28 Responses to My first year PhD regrets/

kamhik says:
November 25, 2010 at 4:49 pm


Hey, Congrats ....

u  o  Rate This



. . I   elenaoLd says:
Nov ember 25, 2010 at 5:50 am


Thanks a lot, Karthik! Hope your PhD is going well!?

o  o  Rate This




Dane says:
November 25, 2010 at 5:20 pm


Hey Elena, I agree with your comments. I especially wished I have read even more in the first year, 
now it always slips away. But like always we should reflect on the past only to think about the 
present and the future. Like they say in the Lord of the Rings: “All we have to decide is what to 
do with the time that is given to us”  Congrats for submitting the transfer report

o  o  Rate This



• • \   elenanhd says:
November 25, 2010 at 5:54 am

Thanks a lot, Dane! Like Tolkien's quote! I am so glad that I have such a great PhD peer who always 
has a phrase of wisdom at hand:)

o  o  Rate This




Sara says:
November 25, 2010 at 6:33 pm


It's all so true but 2 years of my PhD have passed and I still have similar regrets — I talk the 
talk but can't seem to put the plans into action! Still, I am muddling through and learning a lot 
about myself in the process. You never know I might even have a thesis finished one day.

o  o  Rate This

elenaphd snys:
November 25, 2010 at 6:52 pm

Dear Sara! Welcome to the club!:) It's always easier to talk about something than do it. I try 
different things to organise myself better from online calendars to setting strict deadlines. 
That's actually one thing that really works for me. Ask your supervisors to set strict deadlines 
for you for the remainder of your PhD studies to make sure your complete on time. Working under 
pressure helps me to be more productive! You still have a lot of time. One of my PhD advisors once 
mentioned a guy who completed a thesis whithin 5 months. You can do it!

o  o  Rate This
Repjy




Ahmad says:
November 26, 2010 at 12:48 am

I arrived here while i was researching about blogs & Ph.D.. i was thinking of starting a a blog as 
international student doing his Ph.D. i was thinking of informal blog...but i have not made my mind 
yet.

a  n  o Rate This
Reply


elenaphd soys:
November 26, 2010 at 12:54 am

Hi, Ahmad! Sure, go for it! It's always useful to reflect on your experience, and you can also help 
other international PhD students to better understand the PhD process, and adapt to an educational 
system! I am sure it will be very interesting! Good luck, and give me a shout if you need any help.

o  o  Rate This
Reply


My PhD soys:
November 28, 2010 at 1:46 pm

hi elenaphd, i just opened my micro blog at http://mynhd.nosterous.com/ thanks for your 
inspiration..

o   o Rate This


elenaphd soys:
December 3, 2010 at 5:26 pm

Hi, so glad for you! Look forward to your blog posts! Good luck! n  o  o rate This

Gul says:
November 26, 2010 at 6:16 pm

hi elenaphd i am Gul llm student i am studying from university of london but i am his international 
programm i am also interested in phD but in law subjects and want to get admission in uk do you 
know any good universities where i could get an admission ?

o  o o rate This
Reply

elenaphd says:
November 26, 2010 at 6:47 pm

Hi, Gul! Glad to hear that you are going to do a PhD. It's the best learning experience that I've 
ever had in my life. Not sure about Law schools but you can check some ranking here 
http://www.llm-guide.com/most-popular/uk- ireland. Good luck!

o  o < Rate This
Reply.




Jeffrey Keefer says:
December 31, 2010 at 3:12 am

Just stumbled across your work, and can relate in many ways to your sentiments. Great that you are 
sharing this. Alas, if you regret all this after only one year, then perhaps you are too hard on 
yourself!

So, with all this said, what is this topic about which you are so passionate, and what theory are 
you hoping to use?

Jeffrey

o  o o Rate This
Reply




elenaphd soys:
January 21, 2011 at 1:38 pm

Hi, Jeffrey!
So sorry, just realised that I still have note replied to you. Thanks a lot for your comments. In 
my research I am looking at the process of developing employability skills by doctoral researchers 
in social sciences. There is a lot of attention being paid to the formal approach in this area so I 
am tryint to look more deeply into non-formal and workplaces learning activities that PhD students 
are involved in which I believe have a greater impact on development of employability skills. I am 
using various learning theories. The central theoretical framework for my study is an Activity 
theory. How about you? What does your research focus on?

o & o > Rate This
Reply


Jeffrey Keefer says:
January 23, 2011 at 1:51 pm

What an interesting area of study!

When you speak of “developing employability skills by doctoral researchers in social sciences” are 
you referring to research-focused degrees, or professional doctorates?

Jeffrey

o  o < Rate This
Rep_jy



elenaphd says:
January 27, 2011 at 1:44 pm

I am looking at full-time PhD students enrolled on traditional PhD programmes (3 years, full-time 
research).

o  o > Rate This
Reply.



Mahesh Sharma says:
March 21, 2011 at 8:39 am

your story is so inspiring for research scholars like me. i am even a slower learner. My writing 
skills are very poor. can u help me out mentioning some names of the books which i should consult 
to improve my writing skills

o  o < Rate This
Reply.


elenaphd soys:
May 18, 2011 at 1:02 am

Dear Mahesh! So sorry for delay. Writing skills are smth that you master all life I guess. Are you 
using Delicious bookmarking. Here is a link to my collection of bookmarks on academic writing
httn-//www delicious com/elena.golovushkina/writing. Hope you will find smth useful there! Good 
luck with your PhD!

o  o < Rate This




Zed says:
May 3, 2011 at 3:43 pm

I'm in my first year. Your reflections contain some good advice. Seven months in and feeling really 
lost at the moment.

o  o o rate This
Reply


elenaphd says:
May 18, 2011 at 1:00 am

Dear Zed! Sorry for delay! Feeling lost...sounds familiar. No worries...you are not alone! Are you 
on Twitter at all? there are some interesting discussions going on there every Wed at 7.3o at 
#phdchat. Lots of useful advice and peer support. Join in! And chin up! Take is as a learning 
experience whatever happens on your PhD journey!Good luck!

o  o < Rate This
Reply.




Adrian says:
June 9, 2011 at 10:27 pm

Hi,
Thanks GOD, I got something at least to define my current state. You right, its my 4th month of PhD 
and I was in a situation like “What the hell going on :P” . In fact assuming my previous knowledge 
is just multiple with zero. Now after reading your article, again my energy level is up.

*1-2 years PhD students, please do share your experience .

Cheers

o  o o Rate This




theshanshuprophecy. soys:
January 15, 2012 at 1:00 pm

Hi
I stumbled onto your blog tonight after a google search and just wanted to say that you list is 
great but — perhaps you should consider thinking of it as ‘things I learned in my 1st year’ rather 
than regret — although you are a year further in now, I would love to hear your list from and year 
or, are you no longer posting?

o  o < Rate This
Reply.



nagulmeera says:
February 18, 2012 at 7:52 pm

HI my name is nagu1.i need a statement of purpose for my phd in information systems,i have 
completed my MCA in (you). i dnt know how to wright the this letter will you plz help me for 
this.after submitting this sop 1etter,they will decide and sent a mail about my admission.is it 
compulsory a student(fresher)must have a subject know1edge?or not.p1z guys reply for this 
query.even i dnt have that much of knowledge about my subjects but my aim is to do phd.if there is 
any chance to learn in phd deeply about my subjects.my area of interest in databases.

i  o  Rate This
Reply



BeingmrsdrD says:
March 10, 2012 at 9:50 pm

So glad I found your blog! I'm also on the PhD journey (and blog about it) and relate to many of 
the points you raised here.
All the best with your studies

o  o o rate This


Clement soys:
July 12, 2012 at 5:42 pm

any tips on how to narrow your research topic down? I'm really struggling with defining my thesis 
at the moment, and I'm approaching the end of the first year.
Thanks

o  o < Rate This
Reply



ahmed says:
July 24, 2012 at 4:21 pm

please i need help how to do plan for the first year PhD in engineering

o  o o rate This
Reply



Vicky says:
November 7, 2012 at 12:06 am

Tell us about your transfer viva? Highs Lows Hints & Tips would really help. I've got mine next 
week!

o  o o Rate This


elenanhd soys:
November 12, 2012 at 11:05 am

Hi, Vicky! Sorry for delay, having a mad time trying to finish my thesis. I actually did not have a 
transfer viva but I had a transfer report. Basically an extended research proposal that reflected 
all the staged of my thesis writing. I submitted it after one year when I had a clearer idea of the 
thesis content and structure. Hope the viva went well


o  o < Rate This
Reply




My exciting PhD journey!

Blog ct WordPress.com.
