nature.com  Sitemap


Naturejobs  Blog



Previous post
Development and debate about the March for
Science
Log In  Register






Next post How to be good at multitasking


NATUREJOBSI NATUREJOBSBLOG
The start and the middle: beginning your PhD
20 Fgb 2017 [ 13.00 BST | Posted by Jack Leeming I Category: Academia, Blog, Career paths, 
Chemistry, Mobility, PhD, Research, UK

The initial stages of a PhD can be daunting. Fortunately, there are a few ways you can make the 
transition into productive doctoral study as smooth as possible.
Whether you're starting a PhD fresh out of undergrad or after many years of employment, the 
decision to begin a doctorate is a significant career move. When I started, 18 months ago, I 
figured I had a pretty good idea of what I was getting into: I'd previously worked in industry, 
completed a Master's degree, and worked as a research assistant in another lab.

But I soon realized that my PhD was different — in a number of ways — from what I'd done before. 
Here are some things I've learnt so far, and some ways I‘ve made efficient use of my brief time as 
a PhD student.


Preparing for your PhD
Do some presearch

Having some experience of the topic you're about to spend several years of your life studying will 
help your cause significantly. This is especially important if your PhD topic is a departure from 
any previous research experience at Master's level or elsewhere. Ask your supervisor how you can 
prepare in order to hit the ground running. At a minimum, this will include understanding the most 
commonly used techniques in your lab, and mastering the fundamental concepts applicable to your 
project.

Organize your admin

A sizable proportion of your time will be spent writing, creating presentations and generally doing 
work outside the lab. Deciding how you store and organize this from the get-go is essential. 
Backing up work to a server will, at some point, prevent a serious headache. Get into the habit of 
noting down everything
— even seemingly irrelevant events can turn out to be important. Also, track your spending from the 
very beginning by keeping up-to-date records of everything you purchase; consumables, equipment, 
travel costs, the lot. Congratulations, you're now the scientist-accountant you always dreamt of 
being.

Be realistic

Enter your research with a realistic mind-set as to what can actually be achieved — it's unlikely 
you'll

































revolutionize your field in a few years of doctoral study. Balancing this realism with a desire to 
make a unique contribution to knowledge helps manage your own expectations, and is the key to 
making continued progress. You can't do everything!
After you've started
Set clear ‘no further’ markers

During a PhD, time is precious. Occasionally, things just don't work, even after significant time 
and effort spent. It's human nature to persevere with things we really want to resolve. However, 
this can be dangerous — before you know it, six months have gone by and you're no closer to getting 
that technique to work. Consider how necessary a piece of work actually is, and try to compromise. 
For each project, set clear ‘no further’ markers — the maximum time, funding or number of attempts 
you'll allow for something that isn't producing. Don't throw good time after bad! Knowing when to 
move on is essential for long-term productivity.

Take the initiative

Undergrad this is not; no one is going to hold your hand through the next few years. Though your 
supervisor is there to guide you, they will not be the one doing the work, and ultimately you're 
responsible for driving the project. Take the initiative and make things happen.

Read

No one expects you to read every single published paper in minute detail, but it should feel like 
you're coming close. New work is constantly being published, and in an ever-changing research 
landscape, you need to be aware of any significant developments in your field. Try to read and 
digest two or three interesting papers per week at the least. Journal clubs are a good place for 
discussion. Also, read up on topics that fall slightly outside your own. It pays dividends to have 
a well-rounded knowledge base.

Don't be afraid to say no

When you begin your PhD, there'll be opportunities abound. If you think that becoming involved in a 
new project or opportunity will distract you from your primary interest, don't be afraid to turn it 
down. Staying focused on what inspires you will keep your productivity high and your work at its 
best.

Become more than your PhD

The post-PhD job market sucks. While an impressive publication list is valuable, employers of all 
kinds want candidates that can bring more. Get involved in clubs at your institution, write a blog, 
work abroad
— the possibilities are vast. Cultivate your own opportunities and set yourself apart from the 
crowd.



Above all, enjoy it! A PhD is the first step on the ladder to becoming an independent academic, and 
the unique freedom it provides is liberating. Use this freedom productively and, with a bit of 
luck, your results will speak for themselves.



Matthew Nolan is a second year DPhiI candidate in Clinical Neuroscience at the University of 
Oxford, working on selective vulnerability and somatic mosaicism in ALS/FTD. Follow him on twitter: 
@matthew  nolan



Suggested posts

The changing landscape of pharma: a new route for PhDs? Back to the thesis
Can scientists really have work/life balance? Skills for your next networking adventure





Previous post
Development and debate about the March for
Science


Comments

There are currently no comments.

You need to log in or register to comment.



0 2021 Springer Nature Limited. All Rights Reserved.
partner of AGORA, HINARI, OARE, INASP, ORCID, CrossRef and COUNTER
Next post How to be good at multitasking
